FOR REVIEW PURPOSES ONLY (#1)
ckittel/Azure-Governance-Visualizer: setup.md

# Azure Governance Visualizer aka AzGovViz - Setup

This guide will help you to setup and run AzGovViz

* Abbreviations:

>     * Azure DevOps - AzDO

Author: Not an approved abbrivation

```suggestion
```

> # Table of content

Author: ```suggestion

## Table of content

```

    * [Create AzDO Service Connection - Option 1 - Create Service Connections Service Principal in the Azure Portal](#create-azdo-service-connection---option-1---create-service-connections-service-principal-in-the-azure-portal)
      * [AzDO supports Open ID Connect - OIDC](#azdo-supports-open-id-connect---oidc)
      * [Azure Portal](#azure-portal)
      * [Azure DevOps](#azure-devops)
    * [Create AzDO Service Connection - Option 2 - Create Service Connection in AzDO](#create-azdo-service-connection---option-2---create-service-connection-in-azdo)
  * [Grant permissions in Azure](#grant-permissions-in-azure-1)
  * [Grant permissions in Microsoft Entra ID](#grant-permissions-in-microsoft-entra-id)
    * [API permissions](#api-permissions)
  * [Grant permissions on Azure Governance Visualizer AzDO repository](#grant-permissions-on-azure-governance-visualizer-azdo-repository)
  * [OPTION 1 (legacy) - Edit AzDO YAML file (.pipelines folder)](#option-1-legacy---edit-azdo-yaml-file-pipelines-folder)
  * [OPTION 1 (legacy) - Create AzDO Pipeline (.pipelines folder)](#option-1-legacy---create-azdo-pipeline-pipelines-folder)

>   * [OPTION 2 (new) - Edit AzDO Variables YAML file (.azuredevops folder)](#option-2-new---edit-azdo-variables-yaml-file-azuredevops-folder)

Author: ```suggestion
  * [OPTION 2 (recommended) - Edit AzDO Variables YAML file (.azuredevops folder)](#option-2-recommended---edit-azdo-variables-yaml-file-azuredevops-folder)
```

Author: I updated a few of these, your manual TOC should likely get refreshed once you've applied whatever changes you take.

    * [Run Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)](#run-azure-governance-visualizer-in-github-actions-azure-governance-visualizer-yaml)
  * [Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML](#azure-governance-visualizer-oidc-yaml)
    * [Store the credentials in GitHub (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)](#store-the-credentials-in-github-azure-governance-visualizer-oidc-yaml)
    * [Workflow permissions](#workflow-permissions-1)
    * [Edit the workflow YAML file (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)](#edit-the-workflow-yaml-file-azure-governance-visualizer-oidc-yaml)
    * [Run Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)](#run-azure-governance-visualizer-in-github-actions-azure-governance-visualizer-oidc-yaml)
* [Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces](#azure-governance-visualizer-github-codespaces)
* [Optional Publishing the Azure Governance Visualizer HTML to a Azure Web App](#optional-publishing-the-azure-governance-visualizer-html-to-a-azure-web-app)
  * [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  * [Azure DevOps](#azure-devops-1)
  * [GitHub Actions](#github-actions)

> # Azure Governance Visualizer from Accelerator

Author: ```suggestion
## Azure Governance Visualizer from accelerator
```

* The [Azure Governance Visualizer Accelerator](https://github.com/Azure/Azure-Governance-Visualizer-Accelerator) provides an easy and fast deployment process that automates the creation and publishing of AzGovViz to an Azure Web Application and provides automation to configuring the pre-requisites for AzGovViz.

> # Azure Governance Visualizer from Console

Author: ```suggestion
## Azure Governance Visualizer from Console
```

> ## Grant permissions in Azure

Author: ```suggestion
### Grant permissions in Azure
```

* Requirements
    * To assign roles, you must have '__Microsoft.Authorization/roleAssignments/write__' permissions on the target Management Group scope (such as the built-in RBAC Role '__User Access Administrator__' or '__Owner__')

Create a '__Reader__' RBAC Role assignment on the target Management Group scope for the identity that shall run Azure Governance Visualizer

* PowerShell

```powershell
$objectId = "<objectId of the identity that shall run Azure Governance Visualizer>"
$role = "Reader"
$managementGroupId = "<managementGroupId>"

New-AzRoleAssignment `
-ObjectId $objectId `
-RoleDefinitionName $role `
-Scope /providers/Microsoft.Management/managementGroups/$managementGroupId
```

* Azure Portal

> [Assign Azure roles using the Azure portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/role-assignments-portal)

Author: ```suggestion
[Assign Azure roles using the Azure portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/role-based-access-control/role-assignments-portal)
```

> ## Execution options

Author: ```suggestion
### Execution options
```

> ### Option 1 - Execute as a Tenant Member User

Author: ```suggestion
#### Option 1 - Execute as a tenant member user
```

Proceed with step [__Clone the Azure Governance Visualizer repository__](#clone-the-azure-governance-visualizer-repository)

> ### Option 2 - Execute as a Tenant Guest User

Author: ```suggestion
#### Option 2 - Execute as a tenant guest user
```

> If the tenant is hardened (Microsoft Entra ID External Identities / Guest user access = most restrictive) then Guest User must be assigned the Microsoft Entra ID Role '__Directory readers__'

Author: ```suggestion
If the tenant is hardened (Microsoft Entra ID External Identities / Guest user access = most restrictive) then the guest user must be assigned the Microsoft Entra ID role '__Directory readers__'.
```

> &#x1F4A1; [Compare member and guest default permissions](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/azure-docs/blob/master/articles/active-directory/fundamentals/users-default-permissions.md#compare-member-and-guest-default-permissions)

Author: Please link to the publiched Microsoft Learn content, not the GitHub source version of this.

> &#x1F4A1; [Restrict Guest permissions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/enterprise-users/users-restrict-guest-permissions)

Author: ```suggestion
&#x1F4A1; [Restrict guest access permissions in Microsoft Entra ID](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity/users/users-restrict-guest-permissions)
```

#### Assign Microsoft Entra ID Role - Directory readers

* Requirements

>     * To assign roles, you must have '__Privileged Role Administrator__' or '__Global Administrator__' role assigned [Assign Azure AD roles to users](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/roles/manage-roles-portal)

Author: ```suggestion
    * To assign roles, you must have '__Privileged Role Administrator__' or '__Global Administrator__' role assigned [Assign Microsoft Entra roles to users](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity/role-based-access-control/manage-roles-portal).
```

> Assign the Microsoft Entra ID Role '__Directory Reader__' for the Guest User that shall run Azure Governance Visualizer (work with the Guest User´s display name)

Author: ```suggestion
Assign the Microsoft Entra ID role '__Directory Reader__' for the guest user that will run Azure Governance Visualizer. Use with the guest user's display name.
```

* Azure Portal

>     * [Assign a role](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/roles/manage-roles-portal#assign-a-role)

Author: ```suggestion
    * [Assign a role](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity/role-based-access-control/manage-roles-portal#assign-a-role)
```

Proceed with step [__Clone the Azure Governance Visualizer repository__](#clone-the-azure-governance-visualizer-repository)

> ### Option 3 - Execute as Service Principal

Author: ```suggestion
#### Option 3 - Execute as a service principal
```

A Service Principal by default has no read permissions on Users, Groups and Service Principals, therefore we need to grant additional permissions in Microsoft Entra ID

> #### Grant API permissions

Author: ```suggestion
A service principal, by default, has no read permissions on users, groups, and service principals; therefore you need to grant additional permissions in Microsoft Entra ID.

##### Grant API permissions
```

* Requirements

>     * To grant API permissions and grant admin consent for the directory, you must have '__Privileged Role Administrator__' or '__Global Administrator__' role assigned [Assign Azure AD roles to users](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/roles/manage-roles-portal)

Author: ```suggestion
    * To grant API permissions and grant admin consent for the directory, you must have '__Privileged Role Administrator__' or '__Global Administrator__' role assigned [Assign Microsoft Entra roles to users](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity/role-based-access-control/manage-roles-portal)
```

> Grant API permissions for the Service Principal´s Application

Author: ```suggestion
Grant API permissions for the service principal's application.
```

* Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)'
* Click on '__App registrations__'
* Search for the Application that we created earlier and click on it
* Under '__Manage__' click on '__API permissions__'
    * Click on '__Add a permissions__'
    * Click on '__Microsoft Graph__'
    * Click on '__Application permissions__'
    * Select the following set of permissions and click '__Add permissions__'
        * __Application / Application.Read.All__
        * __Group / Group.Read.All__
        * __User / User.Read.All__
        * __PrivilegedAccess / PrivilegedAccess.Read.AzureResources__
    * Click on 'Add a permissions'
    * Back in the main '__API permissions__' menu you will find permissions with status 'Not granted for...'. Click on '__Grant admin consent for _TenantName___' and confirm by click on '__Yes__'
    * Now you will find the permissions with status '__Granted for _TenantName___'

> Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID (AAD) for App registration:

Author: ```suggestion
Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID for the app registration:
```

> ![alt text](img/aadpermissionsportal_4.jpg "Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)")

Author: ```suggestion
![Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID](img/aadpermissionsportal_4.jpg)
```

Proceed with step [__Clone the Azure Governance Visualizer repository__](#clone-the-azure-governance-visualizer-repository)

> ## Clone the Azure Governance Visualizer repository

Author: ```suggestion
### Clone the Azure Governance Visualizer repository
```

* Requirements

>   * To clone the Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub repository you need to have GIT installed

Author: ```suggestion
  * To clone the Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub repository you need to have Git installed.
```

>   * Install Git: [https://git-scm.com/download/win](https://git-scm.com/download/win)

Author: ```suggestion
  * Install Git: [https://git-scm.com/download](https://git-scm.com/download)
```

* PowerShell

```powershell
Set-Location "c:\Git"
git clone "https://github.com/Azure/Azure-Governance-Visualizer.git"
```

Proceed with step [__Run Azure Governance Visualizer from Console__](#run-azure-governance-visualizer-from-console)

> ## Run Azure Governance Visualizer from Console

Author: ```suggestion
### Run Azure Governance Visualizer from console
```

> ### PowerShell & Azure PowerShell modules

Author: ```suggestion
#### PowerShell & Azure PowerShell modules
```

* Requirements
    * Requires PowerShell 7 (minimum supported version 7.0.3)
        * [Get PowerShell](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell#get-powershell)
        * [Installing PowerShell on Windows](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-core-on-windows)
        * [Installing PowerShell on Linux](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-core-on-linux)
    * Requires PowerShell Az Modules
        * Az.Accounts

>           * [Install the Azure Az PowerShell module](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/azure/install-az-ps)

Author: ```suggestion
        * [Installing PowerShell on Windows](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-windows)
        * [Installing PowerShell on Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux)
    * Requires PowerShell Az Modules
        * Az.Accounts
          * [install Azure PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/azure/install-azure-powershell

        * AzAPICall
          * Running from Console the script will prompt you to confirm installation of the required AzAPICall module version
          * AzAPICall resources:
            * [![PowerShell Gallery Version (including pre-releases)](https://img.shields.io/powershellgallery/v/AzAPICall?include_prereleases&label=PowerShell%20Gallery)](https://www.powershellgallery.com/packages/AzAPICall)
            * [GitHub Repository](https://aka.ms/AzAPICall)

> ### Connecting to Azure as User (Member or Guest)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Connecting to Azure as user (member or guest)
```

* PowerShell

```powershell
Connect-AzAccount -TenantId <TenantId> -UseDeviceAuthentication
```

> ### Connecting to Azure using Service Principal

Author: ```suggestion
#### Connecting to Azure using a service principal
```

> Have the '__Application (client) ID__' of the App registration OR '__Application ID__' of the Service Principal (Enterprise Application) and the secret of the App registration at hand

Author: ```suggestion
Have the '__Application (client) ID__' of the App registration OR '__Application ID__' of the service principal (Enterprise Application) and the secret of the App registration at hand.
```

* PowerShell

```powershell
$pscredential = Get-Credential
Connect-AzAccount -ServicePrincipal -TenantId <TenantId> -Credential $pscredential
```

User: Enter '__Application (client) ID__' of the App registration OR '__Application ID__' of the Service Principal (Enterprise Application)

> Password for user \<Id\>: Enter App registration´s secret

Author: ```suggestion
Password for user \<Id\>: Enter App registration's secret
```

### Run Azure Governance Visualizer

Familiarize yourself with the available [parameters](https://github.com/Azure/Azure-Governance-Visualizer#parameters) for Azure Governance Visualizer

* PowerShell

```powershell

> c:\Git\Azure-MG-Sub-Governance-Reporting\pwsh\AzGovVizParallel.ps1 -ManagementGroupId <target Management Group Id>

Author: > c:\Git\Azure-MG-Sub-Governance-Reporting

This path doesn't align with the repo name.

```

Note if not using the `-OutputPath` parameter, all outputs will be created in the current directory. The following example will create the outputs in directory c:\AzGovViz-Output (directory must exist)

* PowerShell

```powershell

> c:\Git\Azure-MG-Sub-Governance-Reporting\pwsh\AzGovVizParallel.ps1 -ManagementGroupId <target Management Group Id> -OutputPath "c:\AzGovViz-Output"

Author: > c:\Git\Azure-MG-Sub-Governance-Reporting

This path doesn't align with the repo name.

```

> # Azure Governance Visualizer in Azure DevOps

Author: ```suggestion
## Azure Governance Visualizer in Azure DevOps
```

> ## Create AzDO Project

Author: ```suggestion
### Create an Azure DevOps project
```

> [Create a project](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/organizations/projects/create-project?view=azure-devops&tabs=preview-page#create-a-project)

Author: ```suggestion
[Create a project](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/devops/organizations/projects/create-project#create-a-project)
```

> ## Import Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub repository

Author: ```suggestion
### Import Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub repository
```

Azure Governance Visualizer Clone URL: `https://github.com/Azure/Azure-Governance-Visualizer.git`

> [Import into a new repo](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/repos/git/import-git-repository?view=azure-devops#import-into-a-new-repo)

Author: ```suggestion
[Import into a new repo](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/devops/repos/git/import-git-repository?view=azure-devops#import-into-a-new-repo)
```

Note: the Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub repository is public - no authorization required

> ## Create AzDO Service Connection

Author: ```suggestion
### Create an Azure DevOps service connection to Azure
```

> For the pipeline to authenticate and connect to Azure we need to create an AzDO Service Connection which basically is a Service Principal (Application)

Author: ```suggestion
For the pipeline to authenticate and connect to Azure you need to create an Azure DevOps service connection which basically is a service principal (Application registration).
```

There are two options to create the Service Connection:

* Options
    * __Option 1__ Create Service Connection´s Service Principal in the Azure Portal

>     * __Option 2__ Create Service Connection in AzDO

Author: ```suggestion
There are two options to create the service connection:

* Options
    * __Option 1__ Create service connection's service principal in the Azure portal
    * __Option 2__ Create service connection in Azure DevOps
```

> ### Create AzDO Service Connection - Option 1 - Create Service Connections Service Principal in the Azure Portal

Author: ```suggestion
#### Create Azure DevOps service connection - Option 1 - Create service connections service principal in the Azure portal
```

> #### AzDO supports Open ID Connect - OIDC

Author: ```suggestion
##### Azure DevOps supports OpenID Connect - OIDC
```

> Using OIDC we will not have the requirement to create a secret, nore store it in AzDO - awesome :)

Author: ```suggestion
Using OIDC you will not have the requirement to create a secret nor store it in Azure DevOps, which is a security benefit of this option.
```

Quick guide for an app registration:

> __AzDO:__

Author: ```suggestion
__Azure DevOps:__
```

* Click on '__Project settings__' (located on the bottom left)

> * Under '__Pipelines__' click on '__Service Connections__'

Author: ```suggestion
* Under '__Pipelines__' click on '__Service connections__'
```

> * Click on '__New service connection__' and select the connection/service type '__Azure Resource Manager__' and click '__Next__'

Author: ```suggestion
* Click on '__Create service connection__' and select the connection/service type '__Azure Resource Manager__' and click '__Next__'
```

* Select Authentication method __Workload Identity federation (manual)__

> ![alt text](img/azdo_oidc_0.jpg "Microsoft Entra ID (AAD) Federated credentials")

Author: ```suggestion
![Microsoft Entra ID Federated credentials](img/azdo_oidc_0.jpg)
```

Copy away:
* value of __Issuer__
* value of __Subject identifier__

> ![alt text](img/azdo_oidc_1.jpg "Microsoft Entra ID (AAD) Federated credentials; issuer, subject identifier")

Author: ```suggestion
![Microsoft Entra ID Federated credentials; issuer, subject identifier](img/azdo_oidc_1.jpg)
```

> __Microsoft Entra ID (AAD):__

Author: ```suggestion
__Microsoft Entra ID:__
```

> * In the Azure Portal navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)'

Author: ```suggestion
* In the Azure portal, navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID'
```

* Click on '__App registrations__'
* Click on '__New registration__'
* Name your application (e.g. 'AzureGovernanceVisualizer_SC')
* Click '__Register__'
* Your App registration has been created
* Under '__Manage__' click on '__Certificates & Secrets__'
* Click on '__Federated credentials__' and '__Add credential__'

> ![alt text](img/azdo_aad_oidc_0.jpg "Microsoft Entra ID (AAD) Federated credentials")

Author: ```suggestion
![Microsoft Entra ID Federated credentials](img/azdo_aad_oidc_0.jpg)
```

Paste the just copied off
* value for __Issuer__
* value for __Subject identifier__

> ![alt text](img/azdo_aad_oidc_1.jpg "Microsoft Entra ID (AAD) Federated credentials; issuer, subject identifier")

Author: ```suggestion
![Microsoft Entra ID Federated credentials; issuer, subject identifier](img/azdo_aad_oidc_1.jpg)
```

#### Azure Portal

> * Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)'

Author: ```suggestion
##### Azure portal

* Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID'
```

* Click on '__App registrations__'
* Click on '__New registration__'
* Name your application (e.g. 'AzureGovernanceVisualizer_SC')
* Click '__Register__'
* Your App registration has been created, in the '__Overview__' copy the '__Application (client) ID__' as we will need it later to setup the Service Connection in AzDO
* Under '__Manage__' click on '__Certificates & Secrets__'
* Click on '__New client secret__'
* Provide a good description and choose the expiry time based on your need and click '__Add__'

> * A new client secret has been created, copy the secret´s value as we will need it later to setup the Service Connection in AzDO

Author: ```suggestion
* A new client secret has been created, copy the secret's value as you will need it later to setup the service connection in Azure DevOps.
```

__Note:__ if you do not assign the RBAC 'Reader' role to the Management group at this stage then the '__Verify__' step in [Azure DevOps](#azure-devops) will fail.
* In the portal proceed to '__Management Groups__', select the scope at which Azure Governance Visualizer will run, usually __Tenant Root Group__
* Go to '__Access Control (IAM)__', '__Grant Access__' and '__Add Role Assignment__', select '__Reader__', click '__Next__'
* Now '__Select Member__', this will be the name of the Application you created above (e.g. 'AzureGovernanceVisualizer_SC').
* Select '__Next__', '__Review + Assign__'  

> #### Azure DevOps

Author: ```suggestion
##### Azure DevOps

```

* Click on '__Project settings__' (located on the bottom left)
* Under '__Pipelines__' click on '__Service Connections__'
* Click on '__New service connection__' and select the connection/service type '__Azure Resource Manager__' and click '__Next__'
* For the authentication method select '__Service principal (manual)__' and click '__Next__'
* For the '__Scope level__' select '__Management Group__'
    * In the field '__Management Group Id__' enter the target Management Group Id
    * In the field '__Management Group Name__' enter the target Management Group Name
* Under '__Authentication__' in the field '__Service Principal Id__' enter the '__Application (client) ID__' that you copied away earlier
* For the '__Credential__' select '__Service principal key__', in the field '__Service principal key__' enter the secret that you copied away earlier
* For '__Tenant ID__' enter your Tenant Id
* Click on '__Verify__'

> * Under '__Details__' provide your Service Connection with a name and copy away the name as we will need that later when editing the Pipeline YAML file

Author: ```suggestion
* Under '__Details__' provide your Service Connection with a name and copy away the name as you will need that later when editing the pipeline YAML file.
```

* For '__Security__' leave the 'Grant access permissions to all pipelines' option checked (optional)
* Click on '__Verify and save__'

> ### Create AzDO Service Connection - Option 2 - Create Service Connection in AzDO

Author: ```suggestion
#### Create Azure DevOps service connection - Option 2 - Create service connection in Azure DevOps
```

* Click on '__Project settings__' (located on the bottom left)
* Under '__Pipelines__' click on '__Service connections__'

> * Click on '__New service connection__' and select the connection/service type '__Azure Resource Manager__' and click '__Next__'

Author: ```suggestion
* Click on '__Create service connection__' and select the connection/service type '__Azure Resource Manager__' and click '__Next__'
```

* For the authentication method select '__Service principal (automatic)__' and click '__Next__'
* For the '__Scope level__' select '__Management Group__', in the Management Group dropdown select the target Management Group (here the Management Group´s display names will be shown), in the '__Details__' section apply a Service Connection name and optional give it a description and click '__Save__'
* A new window will open, authenticate with your administrative account

> * Now the Service Connection has been created

Author: ```suggestion
* Now the service connection has been created.
```

> __Important!__ In Azure on the target Management Group scope an '__Owner__' RBAC Role assignment for the Service Connection´s Service Principal has been created automatically (we do however only require a '__Reader__' RBAC Role assignment! we will take corrective action in the next steps)

Author: ```suggestion
__Important!__ In Azure, on the target Management Group scope, an '__Owner__' RBAC role assignment for the service connection's service principal has been created automatically (you do however only require a '__Reader__' RBAC Role assignment! You will take corrective action in the next steps.)
```

## Grant permissions in Azure

* Requirements
    * To assign roles, you must have '__Microsoft.Authorization/roleAssignments/write__' permissions on the target Management Group scope (such as the built-in RBAC Role '__User Access Administrator__' or '__Owner__')

> Create a '__Reader__' RBAC Role assignment on the target Management Group scope for the AzDO Service Connection´s Service Principal

Author: ```suggestion
    * To assign roles, you must have '__Microsoft.Authorization/roleAssignments/write__' permissions on the target Management Group scope (such as the built-in RBAC role '__User Access Administrator__' or '__Owner__')

Create a '__Reader__' RBAC role assignment on the target Management Group scope for the Azure DevOps service connection's service principal.
```

* PowerShell

```powershell

> $objectId = "<objectId of the AzDO Service Connection´s Service Principal>"

Author: ```suggestion
$objectId = "<objectId of the Azure DevOps service connection's service principal>"
```

$role = "Reader"
$managementGroupId = "<managementGroupId>"

New-AzRoleAssignment `
-ObjectId $objectId `
-RoleDefinitionName $role `
-Scope /providers/Microsoft.Management/managementGroups/$managementGroupId
```

* Azure Portal

> [Assign Azure roles using the Azure portal](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/role-assignments-portal)

Author: ```suggestion
* Azure portal
[Assign Azure roles using the Azure portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/role-based-access-control/role-assignments-portal)
```

> __Important!__ If you have created the AzDO Service Connection in AzDO (Option 2) then you SHOULD remove the automatically created '__Owner__' RBAC Role assignment for the AzDO Service Connection´s Service Principal from the target Management Group

Author: ```suggestion
__Important!__ If you have created the Azure DevOps service connection in Azure DevOps (Option 2) then you SHOULD remove the automatically created '__Owner__' RBAC role assignment for the Azure DevOps service connection's service principal from the target Management Group.
```

## Grant permissions in Microsoft Entra ID

### API permissions

* Requirements

>     * To grant API permissions and grant admin consent for the directory, you must have '__Privileged Role Administrator__' or '__Global Administrator__' role assigned ([Assign Azure AD roles to users](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/roles/manage-roles-portal))

Author: ```suggestion
    * To grant API permissions and grant admin consent for the directory, you must have '__Privileged Role Administrator__' or '__Global Administrator__' role assigned ([Assign Microsoft Entra roles to users](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity/role-based-access-control/manage-roles-portal))
```

> Grant API permissions for the Service Principal´s Application that we created earlier

Author: ```suggestion
Grant API permissions for the service principal's Application that you created earlier.
```

* Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)'
* Click on '__App registrations__'

> * Search for the Application that we created earlier and click on it

Author: ```suggestion
* Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID'
* Click on '__App registrations__'
* Search for the Application that you created earlier and click on it
```

* Under '__Manage__' click on '__API permissions__'
    * Click on '__Add a permissions__'
    * Click on '__Microsoft Graph__'
    * Click on '__Application permissions__'
    * Select the following set of permissions and click '__Add permissions__'
        * __Application / Application.Read.All__
        * __Group / Group.Read.All__
        * __User / User.Read.All__
        * __PrivilegedAccess / PrivilegedAccess.Read.AzureResources__
    * Click on 'Add a permissions'
    * Back in the main '__API permissions__' menu you will find the permissions with status 'Not granted for...'. Click on '__Grant admin consent for _TenantName___' and confirm by click on '__Yes__'
    * Now you will find the permissions with status '__Granted for _TenantName___'

Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID (AAD) for App registration:

> ![alt text](img/aadpermissionsportal_4.jpg "Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)")

Author: ```suggestion
Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID for App registration:
![Permissions in Microsoft Entra ID](img/aadpermissionsportal_4.jpg)
```

> ## Grant permissions on Azure Governance Visualizer AzDO repository

Author: ```suggestion
## Grant permissions on Azure Governance Visualizer Azure DevOps repository
```

> When the AzDO pipeline executes the Azure Governance Visualizer script the outputs should be pushed back to the Azure Governance Visualizer AzDO repository, in order to do this we need to grant the AzDO Project´s Build Service account with 'Contribute' permissions on the repository

Author: ```suggestion
When the Azure DevOps pipeline executes the Azure Governance Visualizer script the outputs should be pushed back to the Azure Governance Visualizer Azure DevOps repository, in order to do this you need to grant the Azure DevOps project's build service account with 'Contribute' permissions on the repository.
```

* Grant permissions on the Azure Governance Visualizer AzDO repository
    * In AzDO click on '__Project settings__' (located on the bottom left), under '__Repos__' open the '__Repositories__' page

>     * Click on the Azure Governance Visualizer AzDO Repository and select the tab '__Security__'

Author: ```suggestion
* Grant permissions on the Azure Governance Visualizer Azure DevOps repository
    * In AzDO click on '__Project settings__' (located on the bottom left), under '__Repos__' open the '__Repositories__' page
    * Click on the Azure Governance Visualizer Azure DevOps repository and select the tab '__Security__'
```

    * On the right side search for the Build Service account
     __%Project name% Build Service (%Organization name%)__ and grant it with '__Contribute__' permissions by selecting '__Allow__' (no save button available)

> ## OPTION 1 (legacy) - Edit AzDO YAML file (.pipelines folder)

Author: ```suggestion
## OPTION 1 (legacy) - Edit Azure DevOps YAML file (.pipelines folder)
```

* Click on '__Repos__'
* Navigate to the Azure Governance Visualizer Repository
* In the folder '__pipeline__' click on '__AzGovViz.yml__' and click '__Edit__'
* Under the variables section
    * Enter the Service Connection name that you copied earlier (ServiceConnection)
    * Enter the Management Group Id (ManagementGroupId)
* Click '__Commit__'

> ## OPTION 1 (legacy) - Create AzDO Pipeline (.pipelines folder)

Author: ```suggestion
## OPTION 1 (legacy) - Create Azure DevOps pipeline (.pipelines folder)
```

* Click on '__Pipelines__'
* Click on '__New pipeline__'
* Select '__Azure Repos Git__'
* Select the Azure Governance Visualizer repository
* Click on '__Existing Azure Pipelines YAML file__'

> * Under '__Path__' select '__/.pipelines/AzGovViz.yml__' (the YAML file we edited earlier)

Author: ```suggestion
* Under '__Path__' select '__/.pipelines/AzGovViz.yml__' (the YAML file you edited earlier)
```

* Click ' __Save__'

> ## OPTION 2 (new) - Edit AzDO Variables YAML file (.azuredevops folder)

Author: ```suggestion
## OPTION 2 (recommended) - Edit Azure DevOps variables YAML file (.azuredevops folder)
```

> >For the '__parameters__' and '__variables__' sections, details about each parameter or variable is documented inline.

Author: ```suggestion
> For the '__parameters__' and '__variables__' sections, details about each parameter or variable is documented inline.
```

* Click on '__Repos__'
* Navigate to the Azure Governance Visualizer repository
* In the folder '__/.azuredevops/pipelines__' click on '__AzGovViz.variables.yml__' and click '__Edit__'
* If needed, modify the '__parameters__' section:

>   * For more information about [parameters](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/runtime-parameters)

Author: ```suggestion
  * For more information about [Runtime parameters](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/process/runtime-parameters)
```

  * [Optional] Update the '__ExcludedResourceTypesDiagnosticsCapableParameters__'
  * [Optional] Update the '__SubscriptionQuotaIdWhitelistParameters__'
* Update the '__Required Variables__' section:
  * Replace `<YourServiceConnection>` with the Service connection name you copied earlier (ServiceConnection)
  * Replace `<YourManagementGroupId>` with the Management Group Id (ManagementGroupId)
* If needed, update the '__Default Variables__' section
* If needed, update the '__Optional Variables__' section

> ### OPTION 2 (new) Create AzDO Pipeline (.azuredevops folder)

Author: ```suggestion
### OPTION 2 (recommended) Create Azure DevOps pipeline (.azuredevops folder)
```

* Click on '__Pipelines__'
* Click on '__New pipeline__'
* Select '__Azure Repos Git__'
* Select the Azure Governance Visualizer repository
* Click on '__Existing Azure Pipelines YAML file__'
* Under '__Path__' select '__/.azuredevops/pipelines/AzGovViz.pipeline.yml__'
* Click ' __Save__'

> ## Run the AzDO Pipeline

Author: ```suggestion
### Run the Azure DevOps pipeline
```

* Click on '__Pipelines__'
* Select the Azure Governance Visualizer pipeline
* Click '__Run pipeline__'

Note: Before the pipeline kicks off it may require you to approve the run (only first time run)

> ## Create AzDO Wiki (WikiAsCode)

Author: ```suggestion
### Create Azure DevOps wiki (WikiAsCode)
```

Once the pipeline has executed successfully we can setup our Wiki (WikiAsCode)

* Click on '__Overview__'
* Click on '__Wiki__'
* Click on '__Publish code as wiki__'
* Select the Azure Governance Visualizer repository
* Select the folder '__wiki__' and click '__OK__'
* Enter a name for the Wiki
* Click '__Publish__'

> # Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions

Author: ```suggestion
## Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions
```

> ## Create GitHub repository

Author: ```suggestion
### Create GitHub repository
```

Create a 'private' repository

> ## Import Code

Author: ```suggestion
### Import code
```

Click on 'Import code'

Use 'https://github.com/Azure/Azure-Governance-Visualizer.git' as clone URL

Click on 'Begin import'

Navigate to your newly created repository
In the folder `./github/workflows` two worklows are available:
1. [AzGovViz.yml](#azgovviz-yaml)
Use this workflow if you want to store your Application (App registration) secret in GitHub

2. [AzGovViz_OIDC.yml](#azgovviz-oidc-yaml)

> Use this workflow if you want leverage the [OIDC (Open ID Connect) feature](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/deployment/security-hardening-your-deployments/configuring-openid-connect-in-azure) - no secret stored in GitHub

Author: ```suggestion
Use this workflow if you want use the [OIDC (OpenID Connect) feature](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/deployment/security-hardening-your-deployments/configuring-openid-connect-in-azure) - no secret stored in GitHub
```

> ## Azure Governance Visualizer YAML

Author: ```suggestion
### Azure Governance Visualizer YAML
```

> For the GitHub Actiom to authenticate and connect to Azure we need to create Service Principal (Application)

Author: ```suggestion
For the GitHub Action to authenticate and connect to Azure you need to a create service principal (Application)
```

> In the Azure Portal navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)'

Author: ```suggestion
In the Azure portal navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID'
```

* Click on '__App registrations__'
* Click on '__New registration__'
* Name your application (e.g. 'AzureGovernanceVisualizer_SC')
* Click '__Register__'
* Your App registration has been created, in the '__Overview__' copy the '__Application (client) ID__' as we will need it later to setup the secrets in GitHub
* Under '__Manage__' click on '__Certificates & Secrets__'
* Click on '__New client secret__'
* Provide a good description and choose the expiry time based on your need and click '__Add__'
* A new client secret has been created, copy the secret´s value as we will need it later to setup the secrets in GitHub

> ### Store the credentials in GitHub (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Store the credentials in GitHub (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)
```

In GitHub navigate to 'Settings'
* Click on 'Secrets'
* Click on 'Actions'
* Click 'New repository secret'
    * Name: CREDS
    * Value:  
```
{
   "tenantId": "<GUID>",
   "subscriptionId": "<GUID>",
   "clientId": "<GUID>",
   "clientSecret": "<GUID>"
}
```

> ### Workflow permissions 

Author: ```suggestion
#### Workflow permissions 
```

In GitHub navigate to 'Settings'  
* Click on 'Actions'  
* Click on 'General'  
* Under 'Workflow permissions' select '__Read and write permissions__'  
* Click 'Save'

> ### Edit the workflow YAML file (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Edit the workflow YAML file (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)
```

* In the folder `./github/workflows` edit the YAML file `AzGovViz.yml`
* In the `env` section enter you Management Group ID
* If you want to continuously run Azure Governance Visualizer then enable the `schedule` in the `on` section

> ### Run Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Run Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions (Azure Governance Visualizer YAML)
```

In GitHub navigate to 'Actions'
* Click 'Enable GitHub Actions on this repository'
* Select the Azure Governance Visualizer workflow
* Click 'Run workflow'

> ## Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML

Author: ```suggestion
### Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML
```

> For the GitHub Actiom to authenticate and connect to Azure we need to create Service Principal (Application). Using OIDC we will not have the requirement to create a secret, nore store it in GitHub - awesome :)

Author: ```suggestion
For the GitHub Action to authenticate and connect to Azure you need to create a service principal (Application). Using OIDC your will not have the requirement to create a secret, nor store it in GitHub.
```

> * Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID (AAD)'

Author: ```suggestion
* Navigate to 'Microsoft Entra ID'
```

* Click on '__App registrations__'
* Click on '__New registration__'
* Name your application (e.g. 'AzureGovernanceVisualizer_SC')
* Click '__Register__'

> * Your App registration has been created, in the '__Overview__' copy the '__Application (client) ID__' as we will need it later to setup the secrets in GitHub

Author: ```suggestion
* Your App registration has been created, in the '__Overview__' copy the '__Application (client) ID__' as you will need it later to setup the secrets in GitHub
```

* Under '__Manage__' click on '__Certificates & Secrets__'
* Click on '__Federated credentials__'
* Click 'Add credential'
* Select Federation credential scenario 'GitHub Actions deploying Azure Resources'
* Fill the field 'Organization' with your GitHub Organization name
* Fill the field 'Repository' with your GitHub repository name
* For the entity type select 'Branch'

> * Fill the field 'GitHub branch name' with your branch name (default is 'master' if you imported the Azure Governance Visualizer repository)

Author: Please consider renaming your main branch to `main` instead of `master` to align with MSFT policy on this topic.

* Fill the field 'Name' with a name (e.g. AzureGovernanceVisualizer_GitHub_Actions)
* Click 'Add'

> ### Store the credentials in GitHub (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Store the credentials in GitHub (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)
```

In GitHub navigate to 'Settings'
* Click on 'Secrets'  
* Click on 'Actions'  
* Click 'New repository secret'  
* Create the following three secrets:  
    * Name: CLIENT_ID  
      Value: `Application (client) ID`  
    * Name: TENANT_ID  
      Value: `Tenant ID`  
    * Name: SUBSCRIPTION_ID  
      Value: `Subscription ID`  

> ### Workflow permissions 

Author: ```suggestion
#### Workflow permissions 
```

In GitHub navigate to 'Settings'  
* Click on 'Actions'  
* Click on 'General'  
* Under 'Workflow permissions' select '__Read and write permissions__'  
* Click 'Save'

> ### Edit the workflow YAML file (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Edit the workflow YAML file (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)
```

* In the folder `./github/workflows` edit the YAML file `AzGovViz_OIDC.yml`

> * In the `env` section enter you Management Group ID

Author: ```suggestion
* In the `env` section enter your Management Group ID
```

* If you want to continuously run Azure Governance Visualizer then enable the `schedule` in the `on` section

> ### Run Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)

Author: ```suggestion
#### Run Azure Governance Visualizer in GitHub Actions (Azure Governance Visualizer OIDC YAML)
```

In GitHub navigate to 'Actions'
* Click 'Enable GitHub Actions on this repository'
* Select the AzGovViz_OIDC workflow
* Click 'Run workflow'

> # Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces

Author: ```suggestion
## Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces
```

> Note: Codespaces is available for organizations using GitHub Team or GitHub Enterprise Cloud. [Quickstart for Codespaces](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/getting-started/quickstart)

Author: ```suggestion
See [Quickstart for Codespaces](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/getting-started/quickstart) to get started.
```

![alt text](img/codespaces0.png "Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces")

![alt text](img/codespaces1.png "Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces")

![alt text](img/codespaces2.png "Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces")

![alt text](img/codespaces3.png "Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces")

> ![alt text](img/codespaces4.png "Azure Governance Visualizer GitHub Codespaces")

Author: This isn't accessible. Please include written instructions for screen reader support.  Thanks.

> # Optional Publishing the Azure Governance Visualizer HTML to a Azure Web App

Author: ```suggestion
## (Optional) Publish the Azure Governance Visualizer HTML to an Azure Web App
```

> There are instances where you may want to publish the HTML output to a webapp so that anybody in the business can see up to date status of the Azure governance.

Author: ```suggestion
There are instances where you may want to publish the HTML output as a web app so that anybody in the business can see up to date status of the Azure governance.
```

There are a few models to do this, the option below is one way to get you started.

> ## Prerequisites 

Author: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites 
```

> * Deploy a simple webapp on Azure. This can be the smallest SKU or a FREE SKU. It doesn't matter whether you choose Windows or Linux as the platform  

Author: ```suggestion
* Deploy a simple Azure Web App on Azure. This can be the smallest SKU or a free SKU. It doesn't matter whether you choose Windows or Linux as the platform.
```

> ![alt text](img/webapp_create.png "Web App Create")

Author: ```suggestion
![Web App Create](img/webapp_create.png)
```

> * Step through the configuration. I typically use the Code for the publish and then select the Runtime stack that you standardize on 

Author: ```suggestion
* Step through the configuration. We recommend you use the Code for the publish and then select the Runtime stack that you standardize on.
```

> ![alt text](img/webapp_configure.png "Web App Configure")

Author: ```suggestion
![Web App Configure](img/webapp_configure.png)
```

* No need to configure anything, unless your organization policies require you to do so  
NOTE: it is a good practice to tag your resource for operational and finance reasons
* In the webapp _Configuration_ add the name of the HTML output file to the _Default Documents_  

> ![alt text](img/webapp_defaultdocs.png "Web App Default documents")

Author: ```suggestion
![Web App Default documents](img/webapp_defaultdocs.png)
```

> * Make sure to configure Authentication!  

Author: ```suggestion
* Make sure to configure appropriate authentication.
```

> ![alt text](img/webapp_authentication.png "Web App Authentication")

Author: ```suggestion
![Web App Authentication](img/webapp_authentication.png)
```

> ## Azure DevOps

Author: ```suggestion
### Azure DevOps
```

> * Assign the Azure DevOps Service Connection´s Service Principal with RBAC Role __Website Contributor__ on the Azure Web App

Author: ```suggestion
* Assign the Azure DevOps service connection's service principal with RBAC role __Website Contributor__ on the Azure Web App.
```

* Edit the `.azuredevops/AzGovViz.variables.yml` file  

> ![alt text](img/webapp_AzDO_yml.png "Azure DevOps YAML variables")

Author: ```suggestion
![Azure DevOps YAML variables](img/webapp_AzDO_yml.png)
```

> ## GitHub Actions

Author: ```suggestion
### GitHub Actions
```

* Assign the Service Principal used in GitHub with RBAC Role __Website Contributor__ on the Azure Web App
* Edit the `.github/workflows/AzGovViz_OIDC.yml` or `.github/workflows/AzGovViz.yml` file  

> ![alt text](img/webapp_GitHub_yml.png "GitHub YAML variables")

Author: ```suggestion
* Assign the service principal used in GitHub with RBAC role __Website Contributor__ on the Azure Web App.
* Edit the `.github/workflows/AzGovViz_OIDC.yml` or `.github/workflows/AzGovViz.yml` file  
![GitHub YAML variables](img/webapp_GitHub_yml.png)
```
